I’ve driven a car for many years and I’ve even changed my car a few times now. Each time I changed my car, the engine remained more or less the same, but the features within the vehicle and its aesthetics continuously changed. Air conditioner, power steering, and power windows were all luxury features in the car at one point, but today, I guess no one buys a car without these essential features. The game-changer for me though was parking assist. The little camera at the back of the car gave me complete visibility of the parking space available. I was no longer required to pop and twist my head out and struggle to park the car, nor did I have to bug my co-passenger to get down and help me navigate my way into a parking spot. The parking assist feature did everything and helped me execute a perfect parallel park. The parking assist feature was my edge for hassle-free car parking. I feel the same edge while trading the markets with the level 3 data Level 3 or the 20 market depth feature is unique and has multiple uses. You’ll probably appreciate the level 3 market window if you have traded at an institutional desk. A regular retail trader would not understand this feature anytime soon, simply because this feature was unavailable all these years until we introduced it for the very first time to the Indian retail traders. The purpose of this chapter is to help you understand how useful this feature is and get you started on building trading strategies around this feature. If you are entirely new to this, I’d suggest you read this blog (https://zerodha.com/z-connect/featured/introducing-20-depth-or-level-3-data-beta-on-kite) to understand what the level 3 data is all about. Assuming you know what it is, this chapter will help you understand the multiple uses of this feature. For the option traders, the 20-depth order book gives great visibility into the availability of contracts to trade and help identify better price points to execute these trade. Without this visibility, it becomes really hard to trade illiquid contracts. While I’m specifically talking about options here, you can extend this to Futures contracts as well, especially the illiquid ones. Let us put this in context, have a look at the regular market depth (i.e. the top 5 bid-ask) of the 13000 CE expiring in Jan 2020. We can see narrow bids on the left and a notch better offer on the right. You’d probably hesitate to trade this contract if you are someone looking at trading a few lots of Nifty. But check what’s hiding under the hood here by opening the level 3 data –  As you can see, there are many contracts available, but they are not visible in the regular market depth. In fact, the bid and offer quantities are heavily concentrated below the 8 th row respectively. Given the availability of the contracts in this strike, the perspective to trade or not completely changes and will now depend upon your trading strategy. Level 3 data gives you full visibility of the approximate execution price for your trade. This is particularly useful when you decide to scalp the market. When you scalp the market — Let us say you want to buy and sell 5000 shares of Hindustan Zinc; the regular market depth window gives you the following information —  As you can see, there is no visibility on how these 5000 shares will get filled. Now, take a look at the 20 depth window —  The 20 depth window paints an entirely different picture. It not only tells me that I’ll get the 5000 shares, but it also gives me information about the approximate buy price. If I were to place a market order for 5000 shares, I’d be buying this order book from 210.5 to 211.25. I also see at 211; there are 2425 shares available, so I can expect the average price is at or around 211. Now, my decision to scalp the stock should depend on the pop I’d expect over and above 211. Maybe 211.5 or so. Of course, you’ll get the exact breakeven (post charges) if you were to use a brokerage calculator. Level 3 market window plays a critical role in ‘guesstimating’ the number of shares to trade, given the liquidity of the stock. For the sake of this discussion, we will assume that the availability of capital is not an issue. Now, have a look at the regular market depth — You expect Siemens to move from 1675 to about 1690 over the next hour. So, given the fact that you are not constrained by capital, how many shares will you buy for this intraday trade? The regular market depth window suggests that you can buy close to 175 shares. However, the 20 depth opens up a different perspective altogether — In fact, the liquidity in this stock lies below the best five bid and ask, and the impact cost is reasonable. The regular market depth window fails to capture this information. Assuming you intend to buy about 1500 shares, the buy price will lie somewhere within 1675.5 to 1678, which is spread of 0.149%. In this case, assuming you are sure about the target price (1690), you can go all in and buy through whatever is available at that moment. You can extend the position sizing concept and use the 20 depth market watch to place a stop loss or a limit order. Assume you have an intraday buy position in VST Tillers at 1313.8. The question is, where you would place the stop loss for this trade? Can the 20 market depth help us with this? Of course. Have a look at the 20 depth window for VST Tillers. As you can see, there is a concentration of bids in 1290. The good part is that the number of order count is also the highest (35) in 1290. This implies that several traders have placed an order at 1290, indicating some sort of price action at that level. This perhaps builds a case for placing the stop-loss. A prudent trader would probably place a stoploss not at 1290, but maybe at a price just below it. So I was a buyer in this stock, then purely based on 20 depth I’d probably place my SL at 1290 or below, maybe at 1287 and by the same logic, set my target at 1340 or at 1338.8. I find this extremely interesting. In the example above, we identified 1290 as the stoploss price, simply because there was a concentration of bids. In other words, we expect 1290 as a support price. If this is indeed true, then it should show up on the charts as well, right? Have a look at the chart below – Clearly, there is some price action around 1296. Remember, support and resistance is not one price point, but rather a range. Therefore 1290 – 1300 marks as an intraday support for this stock. This is a perfect example of seeing the price action concept play out in the market. Another way to look at this is first to identify the S&R level and then check the 20 depth to figure if there is a concentration of bids/offers in that zone.  Hopefully, by now you’ve started to appreciate the immeasurable value 20 depth order book brings to you while trading. Remember, irrespective of which technique you use to develop a point of view (technical or quantitative analysis), things boil down to price, and the action trades take at that price. The 20 depth market window is essentially your ticket to validate the truth of this price action. Make sure you use your card wisely! Do post your comments and tell us how differently you will use the 20 depth window for identifying trading opportunities. Good luck!   cannot see market depth You need to have generated at least 100 Rupees in brokerage to see the 20 depth. Please check this – https://zerodha.com/z-connect/featured/introducing-20-depth-or-level-3-data-beta-on-kite (https://zerodha.com/z-connect/featured/introducing-20-depth-or-level-3-data-beta-on-kite) Very nicely written, thank you for your incredible insight. Salman, thank you Sir, how will the market depth data be relied upon? When clients or trading systems use the disclosed quantity feature, not the entire quantity is shown. In such a case, isn’t there a chance that the wrong assumptions are made looking at just the market depth? Valid point, but there is no way one can identify disclosed quantity. By the way, level 3 helps you identify contract availability. Given this, the disclosed quantity, if any, will only make the liquidity situation better. Hi Karthik! Newbie here, under the ‘The 20 Market Depth (level 3 data) Window’ section, you’ve said – If you are entirely new to this, I’d suggest you read this blog to understand what the level 3 data is all about. Are you referring to this chapter as the blog or have a separate blog elsewhere, in which case I do not see a link to it. Can you help? ‘Read this blog’ is hyperlinked Amazing featute for the reatil traders. Way to go team for bringing such innovative and pro Tools to the world at such decent costs. Happy learning and trading  Name (required)    Mail (will not be published) (required)      Post comment    Δ Varsity by Zerodha © 2015 – 2024. All rights reserved. Reproduction of the Varsity materials, text and images, is not permitted. For media queries, contact press@zerodha.com (mailto:press@zerodha.com)

Trading or investing based on just company-specific information may not be sufficient. Outside events, both economic and/or non-economic, impact stocks and the market’s performance in general. It is also important to understand the events that influence the markets. In this chapter, we will try to understand some common events and how the stock market reacts to these events. The monetary policy is a tool through which the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) controls the money supply by controlling the interest rates. RBI is India’s central bank. Likewise, every country’s central bank is responsible for setting interest rates. For example, the European Central Bank in Europe and Federal Reserves in the US. Central Banks tweak the interest rates to control the money supply in the mainstream economy. While setting the interest rates, the RBI has to strike a balance between growth and inflation. In a nutshell – if the interest rates are high, the borrowing rates are high (particularly for corporations). If corporate can’t borrow easily, they cannot grow. If corporations don’t grow, the economy slows down. On the other hand, borrowing becomes easier when the interest rates are low. This translates to more money in the hands of corporations and consumers. With more money, there is increased spending which means the sellers tend to increase the prices of goods and services, leading to inflation. I’d encourage you to watch this YouTube video where I’ve tried to explain what causes inflation and the means through which RBI controls inflation. To strike a balance, the RBI has to consider all economic factors and carefully set the key rates. Any imbalance in these rates can lead to economic chaos. The key RBI rates that you need to track are as follows: Repo Rate – Banks can borrow from the RBI. The rate at which RBI lends money to other banks is called the Repo Rate. If the repo rate is high, the cost of borrowing is high, leading to slow economic growth. You can check the latest repo rate (And other rates, too) on RBI’s website (https://www.rbi.org.in/) . Markets don’t like the RBI increasing the repo rates because it slows down economic growth. Reverse repo rate – Reverse Repo rate is the rate at which RBI borrows money from banks. Or in other words, Reverse Repo is the deposit rate RBI offers to other banks when the banks park funds with RBI. When banks deposit money to RBI, they are certain that RBI will not default, so the rate RBI offers is relatively low. However, the banking system’s money supply reduces when banks deposit money with RBI (at a lower rate) instead of the corporate entity. An increase in the reverse repo rate is not great for the economy as it tightens the money supply. Sometimes via the central bank’s policy, the central bank mandates higher deposits by banks; again, this is a way to curtail excess money supply in the mainstream economy. Cash reserve ratio (CRR) – Every bank must maintain funds with RBI. The amount that they maintain is dependent on the CRR. If CRR increases, more money is sucked out of the mainstream economy, which is not good for the economy. The monetary policy committee members meet regularly to review the economic situation and decide upon these key rates; hence keeping track of the monetary policy event is a must for any active trader. The first to react to rate decisions would be interest-rate sensitive stocks across various sectors such as – banks, automobiles, housing finance, real estate, metals, etc. Inflation is a sustained increase in the general prices of goods and services. Increasing inflation erodes the purchasing power of money. All things being equal, if the cost of 1 KG of onion has increased from Rs.15 to Rs.20, this price increase is attributed to inflation. Inflation is inevitable, but a high inflation rate is not desirable as it could lead to economic uneasiness. A high level of inflation tends to send a bad signal to markets. Both the Government and RBI work towards reducing inflation to a manageable level. Inflation is generally measured using an index. If the inflation index increases by certain percentage points, it indicates rising inflation. Likewise, an index falling indicates inflation cooling off. There are two inflation indices – The Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI). Wholesale Price Index (WPI) – The WPI indicates the movement in prices at the wholesale level. It captures the price change when goods are bought and sold wholesale. WPI is an easy and convenient method to calculate inflation. The inflation measured here is at an institutional level and does not necessarily capture the consumer’s inflation. Consumer Price Index  (CPI) – The CPI, on the other hand, captures the effect of the change in prices at a retail level. As a consumer, CPI inflation is what matters. The calculation of CPI is quite detailed as it involves classifying consumption into various categories and subcategories across urban and rural regions. Each of these categories is made into an index, the final CPI index is a composition of several internal indices. The CPI captures the effect of inflation on daily household consumables like fruits, vegetables, cereals, and even fuels like petrol and diesel. The computation of CPI is quite rigorous and detailed. It is one of the most critical metrics for studying the economy.  A national statistical agency, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI), publishes the CPI numbers around the 2 nd week of every month. The RBI’s challenge is to strike a balance between inflation and interest rates. Usually, a low-interest rate tends to increase inflation, and a high-interest rate tends to arrest inflation. The Index of Industrial Production (IIP)  is a short-term indicator of the country’s industrial sector’s progress. The data is released every month (along with inflation data) by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI). As the name suggests, the IIP measures the Indian industrial sectors’ production, keeping a fixed reference point. As of today, India uses the reference point of 2004-05. The reference point is also called the base year. Roughly about 15 different industries submit their production data to the ministry, which collates the data and releases it as an index number. If the IIP increases, it indicates a vibrant industrial environment (as the production is going up) and hence a positive sign for the economy and markets. A decreasing IIP indicates a sluggish production environment, hence a negative sign for the economy and markets. To sum up, an upswing in industrial production is good for the economy, and a downswing rings an alarm. As India is getting more industrialized, the relative importance of the Index of Industrial Production is increasing. A lower IIP number puts pressure on the RBI to lower the interest rates and aid industrial credit with cheaper credit. The Purchasing managers’ index (PMI) is an economic indicator that tries to capture business activity across the country’s manufacturing and service sectors. This is a survey-based indicator where the respondents – usually the purchasing managers- indicate their business perception change concerning the previous month. A separate survey is conducted for the service and manufacturing sectors. The data from the survey are consolidated on a single index. Typical areas covered in the survey include new orders, output, business expectations, and employment. The PMI number usually oscillates around 50. A reading above 50 indicates expansion, and below 50 indicates a contraction in the economy. And reading at 50 indicates no change in the economy. A Budget is an event during which the Ministry of Finance discusses the country’s finance in detail. The Finance Minister, on behalf of the ministry, makes a budget presentation to the entire country. During the budget, major policy announcements and economic reforms are announced, which impacts various industries across the markets. Therefore the budget plays a vital role in the economy. To illustrate this further, in one of the recent budgets, the expectation was to increase the duties on a cigarette. As expected, during the budget, the Finance Minister raised the duties on a cigarette, so the prices increased. An increased cigarette price has a few implications: In reaction to the budget announcement, ITC traded 3.5% lower for this precise reason. A budget is an annual event, and it is announced during the last week of February. However, the budget announcement could be delayed under certain special circumstances, such as a new government formation. Corporate earning season is perhaps one of the important events to which the stocks react. The listed companies (trading on the stock exchange) must declare their earnings once every quarter, also called the quarterly earnings numbers. During an earnings announcement, the corporate gives out details on various operational activities, including: Besides, some companies give an overview of what to expect from the upcoming quarters. This forecast is called ‘corporate guidance.’ Invariably every quarter, the first blue-chip company to make the quarterly announcement is Infosys Limited. They also give out guidance regularly. Market participants follow what Infosys has to say regarding guidance as it impacts the markets. The table below gives you an overview of the earning season in India: Do note that the 1st of April in India marks the beginning of the financial year. In the US, the financial year starts on 1st Jan, so the first quarter starts from January through March, and so forth. Every quarter when the company declares its earnings, the market participants match the earnings with their expectations of how much the company should have earned. The market participant’s expectation is called the ‘street expectation.’ The stock price will react positively if the company’s earnings are better than the street expectations. The stock price will react negatively if the actual numbers are lower than the street expectation. If the street expectation and actual numbers match, the stock price tends to trade flat with a negative bias more often than not. This is mainly because the company could not give any positive surprises. Apart from the events we discussed above, it would be best to watch out for other non-financial events to understand their impact on markets. For example, the Covid crisis of 2020 had a significant effect on economies around the world, disrupting the world economic order. The supply chain took a hit across the globe leading to an inflation spike. That said, there were select pockets of the economy that did very well, mainly the online services industry. Events like the Russia – Ukraine war or the tension between China and Taiwan have impacted world markets. Geo-political affairs such as these impact various connected economies. For instance, the war between Russia and Ukraine affects the supply of natural gas and crude oil, which significantly impacts the energy costs in Europe. As an active trader or a market participant, you need to watch out for these events and understand how these events can impact the markets. While the world economies are interconnected, isolated events (Country specific) impact the local economy. For example, the elections in India impact only the Indian economy. So, keep an eye on these non-financial events and how they can impact the stock markets or sometimes specific industries. Key takeaways from this chapter 1. From the close of a quarter/financial year, what are the time limits within which companies must declare the results? 2. In case of insider trading (SAST), what is the time limit to inform the exchanges about it ? 3. Is there any rule/law making it mandatory for companies to report events with financial significance? Answers in the same order – 1) If I’m not wrong companies must declare results  within 30 days 2) In order to make it a level playing field SEBI mandates the companies to disclose insider trading ‘at the earliest’, which pretty much means the company has to declare this information within the same trading day 3) Yes companies have to declare this information. Hi, What is insider trading and SAST ? How it works? Is their any facility into Versity to get notification once get solution of query? You should get an email notification when this gets answered. Anyway, insider trading is basically trading on information not known to the public. For example, an employee of TCS can buy the shares of TCS based on his knowledge of the quarterly results yet to be announced. Thanks Karthik Cheers! By 8% & 7% in Repo and Reverse repo rate, do you mean it is same as we borrow from banks at 11 % ? No, repo & reverse repo rate are rate at which banks transact with RBI. The lending rates to us are different. Sir, i am not able to understand “Purchasing managers index(PMI)” PMI or the Purchasing Manager’s Index is an index which measures the activity of a purchasing manager (PM) of a company. This is measured by running a survey across many PM’s across sectors and industries. If the PM is sheen to be purchasing things for the company then the perception of growth and industrial activity is created, which is good for the markets. Else its considered not so good. Thank you sir Welcome Important & better for new trader You bet, it is.  Name (required)    Mail (will not be published) (required)      Post comment    Δ Varsity by Zerodha © 2015 – 2024. All rights reserved. Reproduction of the Varsity materials, text and images, is not permitted. For media queries, contact press@zerodha.com (mailto:press@zerodha.com)

If you have spent some time in the market, then I’m certain you’ve been bombarded with market jargon of all sorts. Most of us get used to these jargon and start using them without actually understanding what they mean. I’m guilty of using a few jargon without understanding the true meaning of it, and I get a feeling that some of you reading this may have experienced the same. One such jargon is – momentum. I’m sure we have used momentum in our daily conversations related to the markets, but what exactly is momentum, and how is it measured? When asked, traders loosely define momentum as the speed at which the markets move. This is correct to some extent, but that’s not all, and we should certainly not limit our understanding to just that. ‘Momentum’ is a physics term. It refers to the quantity of motion an object has. If you look at this definition in the context of stock markets, everything remains the same, except that you will have to replace ‘object’ with stocks or the index. Momentum is the rate of change of stock returns or the index. If the rate of change of returns is high, then the momentum is considered high; if the rate of change of returns is low, the momentum is considered low. This leads us to the next obvious question i.e. what is the rate of change of returns? The rate of change of return, as it states the return generated  (or eroded) between two reference periods. For the sake of this discussion, let’s stick to the rate of change of return on an end-of-day basis. So in this context, the rate of change of returns means the speed at which the daily return of the stock varies. To understand this better, consider this example – The table above shows an arbitrary stock’s daily closing price for six days. Two things to note here – Consider another example – Two things need to note – Given the behavior of these two stocks, I have two questions for you – To answer these questions, you can look at either the absolute change in the Rupee value or the percentage change from a close-to-close perspective. If you look at the absolute Rupee change, the change in Stock A is higher than in Stock B. However, this is not the right way to look at the change in daily return. For instance, in absolute Rupee terms, stocks in the range of, say, 2000 or 3000 will always have a higher change compared to stocks in the range of 1000 or lower. Hence, evaluating absolute Rupee change will not suffice, and therefore we need to look at the percentage change. In terms of percentage change, Stock B’s daily change is higher, and therefore we can conclude that Stock B has a higher momentum. Here is another situation, consider this – Stock A has trended up consistently daily, while stock B has been quite a dud all along except for the last two days. On an overall basis, if you check the percentage change over the 7 days, then both have delivered similar results. Given this, which of these two stocks is considered to have good momentum? Well, Stock A is consistent in terms of daily returns, exhibits a good uptrend, and, therefore, can be considered to have continuity in showcasing momentum. Now, what if I decide to measure momentum slightly differently? Instead of daily returns, what if we were to look at the return on a 7 days basis? If we do that, stocks A and B qualify as momentum stocks. The point I’m trying to make here is that traders generally look at momentum in terms of daily returns, which is perfectly valid, but this is not necessarily the only way to look at momentum. The momentum strategy we will discuss later in this chapter looks at momentum on a larger time frame, not daily. More on this later. I hope by now; you do have a sense of what momentum means and understand that momentum can be measured not just in terms of daily returns but also in terms of larger time frames. High-frequency traders measure momentum on a minute-to-minute or hourly basis. Among the many trading strategies traders use, momentum is one of the most popular strategies. Traders measure momentum in many different ways to identify opportunity pockets. The core idea across all these strategies remains the same, i.e., to identify momentum and ride the wave. Momentum strategies can be developed on a single-stock basis. The idea is to measure momentum across all the stocks in the tracking universe and trade the ones that showcase the highest momentum. Remember, momentum can be either long or short, so a trader following a single stock momentum strategy will get both long and short trading opportunities. Traders also develop momentum strategies on a sector-specific basis and set up sector-specific trades. The idea here is to identify a sector that exhibits strong momentum; this can be done by checking momentum in sector-specific indices. Once the sector is identified, look for the stocks that display maximum strength in terms of momentum. Momentum can also be applied on a portfolio basis. This involves portfolio creation with, say ‘n’ number of stocks, with each stock showcasing momentum. In my opinion, this is an excellent strategy as it is not just a plain vanilla momentum strategy but also offers safety in diversification. We will discuss one such strategy wherein the idea is to create a stock basket, aka a portfolio of 10 momentum stocks. Once created, the portfolio is held until the momentum lasts and then re-balanced. Before we discuss this strategy, I want you to note a few things – Given the above, here is a systematic guide to building a ‘Momentum Portfolio’. Step 1  – Define your stock universe As you may know, there are close to 4000 stocks on BSE and about 1800 on NSE. This includes highly valuable companies like TCS and absolute thuds such as almost all the Z category stocks on BSE. Companies such as these form the two extreme ends of the spectrum.  Do you have to track all these stocks to build a momentum portfolio? Not really. Doing so would be a waste of time. One has to filter out the stocks and create the ‘tracking universe.’ The tracking universe will consist of a large basket of stocks within which we will pick stocks to constitute the momentum portfolio. The momentum portfolio will always be a subset of the tracking universe. Think of the tracking universe as a collection of your favorite shopping malls. Maybe out of the 100s of malls in your city, you may go to 2-3 shopping malls repeatedly. Clothes bought from these 2-3 malls comprise your entire wardrobe (read portfolio). Hence, these 2-3 malls form your tracking universe out of the 100s available in your city. The tracking universe can be pretty straightforward – the Nifty 50 or BSE 500 stocks. Therefore, the momentum portfolio will always be a subset of the Nifty 50 or BSE 500 stocks. Keeping the BSE 500 stocks as your tracking universe is an excellent way to start. However, if you feel adventurous, you can custom-create your tracking universe. Custom creation can be on any parameter – for example, out of the entire 1800 stocks on NSE, I could use a filter to weed out stocks that have a market cap of at least 1000 Crs. This filter alone will shrink the list to a much smaller, manageable set. Further, I may add other criteria, such as the stock price should be less than 2000. So on and so forth. I have randomly shared a few filter ideas, but you get the point. Using custom creation techniques helps you filter out and build a tracking universe that matches your requirement. Lastly, from my personal experience, I would suggest you have at least 150-200 stocks in your tracking universe if you wish to build a momentum portfolio of 12-15 stocks. Step 2  – Set up the data Assuming your tracking universe is set up, you can proceed to the 2 nd step. In this step, you must ensure you get the closing prices of all the stocks in your tracking universe. Ensure your data set is clean and adjusted for corporate actions like the bonus issue, splits, special dividends, and other corporate actions. Clean data is the crucial building block to any trading strategy. There are plenty of data sources from where you can download the data for free, including the NSE/BSE websites. The question is – what is the lookback period? How many historical data points are required? To run this strategy, you only need 1-year data point. For example, today is 2 nd March 2019; then I’d need data points from 1 st March 2018 to 2 nd March 2019. Please note once you have the data points for the last one-year set, you can update this daily, which means the daily closing prices are recorded. Step 3  – Calculate returns This is a crucial part of the strategy; in this step, we calculate the returns of all the stocks in the tracking universe. As you may have already guessed, we calculate the return to get a sense of the momentum in each stock. As discussed earlier in this chapter, one can calculate the returns on any frequency, be it daily/weekly/monthly, or even yearly returns. We will stick to yearly returns for the sake of this discussion; however, please note; you can add your own twist to the entire strategy and calculate the returns for any time frame you wish. Instead of yearly, you could calculate the half-yearly, monthly, or even fortnightly returns. So, you should have a tracking universe of about 150-200 stocks at this stage. All these stocks should have historical data for at least 1 year. Further, you need to calculate the yearly return for each stock in your tracking universe. To help you understand this better, I’ve created a sample tracking universe with just about ten stocks in it. The tracking universe contains the data for the last 365 days. The 1-year returns are calculated as well – If you are wondering how the returns are calculated, then this is quite straightforward, let us take the example of ABB – Return = [ending value/starting value]-1 = [1244.55/1435.55]-1 = -13.31% Relatively straightforward, I guess. Step 4 – Rank the returns Once the returns are calculated, you need to rank the returns from the highest to the lowest returns. For example, Asian paints has generated a return of 25.87%, the highest in the list. Hence, the rank of Asian paints is 1. The second highest is HDFC Bank, which will get the 2 nd rank.  Infosys’s return, on the other hand, is -35.98%, the lowest in the list; hence the rank is 10. So on and so forth. Here is the ‘return ranking’ for this portfolio – If you are wondering why the returns are negative for most of the stocks, that’s how stocks behave when deep corrections hit the market. I wish I had opted to discuss this strategy at a better point. So what does this ranking tell us? If you think about it, the ranking reorders our tracking universe to give us a list of stocks from the highest return stock to the lowest. For example, from this list, I know that Asian Paints has been the best performer (in terms of returns) over the last 12 months. Likewise, Infy has been the worst. Step 5 – Create the portfolio A typical tracking universe will have about 150-200 stocks, and with the help of the previous step, we would have reordered the tracking universe. Now, we can create a momentum portfolio with the reordered tracking universe. Remember, momentum is the rate of change of return, and the return itself is measured yearly. A good momentum portfolio contains about 10-12 stocks. I’m comfortable with up to 15 stocks in the portfolio, not more than that. For the sake of this discussion, let us assume that we are building a 12 stocks momentum portfolio. The momentum portfolio is now the top 12 stocks in the reordered tracking universe. In other words, we buy all the stocks starting from rank 1 to rank 12. In the example we were dealing with, if I were to build a 5-stock momentum portfolio, then it would contain – The rest of the stocks would not constitute the portfolio but will remain in the tracking universe. You may ask what is the logic of selecting this subset of stocks within the tracking universe? Well, read this carefully – if the stock has done well (in terms of returns generated) for the last 12 months, it implies that it has good momentum for the defined time frame. The expectation is that this momentum will continue onto the 13 th month, and therefore the stock will continue to generate higher returns.  So if you were to buy such stocks, you are to benefit from the expected momentum in the stock. This is a claim. I do not have data to back this up, but I have successfully used this technique for several years. It is easy to back-test this strategy, and I encourage you to do so. Back in the day, my trading partner and I were encouraged to build this momentum portfolio after reading this ‘Economist’ article. You need to read this article before implementing this strategy. Once the momentum portfolio stocks are identified, the idea is to buy all the momentum stocks in equal proportion. So if the capital available is Rs.200,000/- and there are 12 stocks, the idea is to buy Rs.16,666/- worth of each stock (200,000/12). By doing so, you create an equally weighted momentum portfolio. Of course, you can tweak the weights to create a skewed portfolio, there is no problem with it, but then you need a solid reason for doing so.  This reason should come from backtested results. If you like to experiment with skewed portfolios, here are few ideas – So on and so forth. Ideally, the approach to capital allocation should come from your backtesting process, this also means you will have to backtest various capital allocation techniques to figure out which works well for you. Step 6 – Rebalance the portfolio So far, we have created a tracking universe, calculated the 12-month returns, ranked the stocks in terms of the 12-month returns, and created a momentum portfolio by buying the top 12 stocks. The momentum portfolio was built based on the 12-month performance, hoping to continue to showcase the same performance for the 13 th month. There are a few assumptions here – Now the question is, what happens at the end of the month? At the end of the month, you re-run the ranking engine and figure out the top 10 or 12 stocks which have performed well over the last 12 months. Do note at any point, we consider the latest 12 months of data. So, we now buy the stocks from rank 1 to 12, just like we did in the previous month. From my experience, chances are that out of the initial portfolio, only a hand full of stocks would have changed positions. So based on the list, you sell the stocks that no longer belong in the portfolio and buy the new stocks featured in the latest momentum portfolio. In essence, you rebalance the portfolio and you do this at the end of every month. So on and so forth. Before we close this chapter (and this module), I’d like to touch upon a few variations to this strategy. The returns have been calculated on a 12-month portfolio and the stocks are held for a month. However, you don’t have to stick to this. You can try out various options, like – As you can see, the options are plenty, and your imagination only restricts it. If you think about what we have discussed so far, the momentum portfolio is price based. However, you can build a fundamental-based momentum strategy as well. Here are a few ideas – You can do this on any fundamental parameter – EPS growth, profit margin, EBITDA margin etc. The beauty of these strategies is that the data is available, hence backtesting gets a lot easier. As good as it may seem, the price-based momentum strategy works well only when the market is trending up. When the markets turn choppy, the momentum strategy performs poorly, and when the markets go down, the momentum portfolio bleeds heavier than the markets itself. Understanding the strategy’s behavior with respect to the market cycle is crucial to this portfolio’s eventual success. I learned it the hard way. I had a great run with this strategy in 2009 and ’10 but took a bad hit in 2011. So before you execute this strategy, do your homework (backtesting) right. Having said all of that, let me reassure you – a price-based momentum strategy, if implemented in the proper market cycle can give you great returns, in fact, better more often than not, better than the market returns. Good luck and happy trading. Key takeaways from this chapter Dear sir,What about volatility based delta hedging strategy? Kehav, perhaps I’ll add that sometime as an addendum. Moving forward onto the next module. When will Varsity Android app launch.. waiting for it.. Here you go, Ankit – https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.zerodha.varsity&showAllReviews=true (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.zerodha.varsity&showAllReviews=true) , please don’t forget to rate us on play store Hey thanks sir.. app is awsum.. hopeing for all the modules to be added soon.. and even the new app of kite 3 is awsum.. thanks alot… I’m happy to note that, Ankit! Lots of efforts towards building these apps Yes, eventually all the modules will be added to the app. Did you check out the wall feature? h1 Sir, Thanks for an this topic was waiting for it to be covered.. According to you which is the best source to get eod data which is adjusted of splits and bonus for bse 500 stocks apart from nse/bse websites. And secondly you said u need a coder to get a this strategy working can u share excel sheets to calculate momentum score as you did for pair trading chapter Thanks Nick, there are plenty of data vendors who provide you clean data. I’d suggest you subscribe to any of them. Unfortunately, I was unable to produce the excel, hence I took up the example of 10 stocks. At present I am investing on long-term basis and good results and very much Happy with the returns. I want to start trading shortly and watching articles related… thanks… waiting further. Good luck, Shakeel! Sir correct me if I’m wrong but this is one of the longest chapters in varsity and I enjoyed reading it in one sitting. I’m currently in the process of back testing the portfolio based on momentum. What would the next chapter be about sir? I’m glad you could read through it in one sitting, do share the backtested results if you are comfortable with it  This module ends with this chapter. We are moving ahead with the next one.  Name (required)    Mail (will not be published) (required)      Post comment    Δ Varsity by Zerodha © 2015 – 2024. All rights reserved. Reproduction of the Varsity materials, text and images, is not permitted. For media queries, contact press@zerodha.com (mailto:press@zerodha.com)

